Monitoring Sample Quality
A sample/hybridization should be flagged and possibly removed when several metrics are outliers within the distribution of samples. If none of these metrics consistently denotes an outlier sample, then a researcher should confidently proceed with downstream analysis.

pos_vs_neg_auc
This is the "area under the curve", or AUC value for a ROC curve which plots the detection of positive controls against the false detection of negative controls.
This metric is a robust measurement for overall data quality. Typical values range between 0.8 and 0.9, with a value of 1.0 being perfect and a value of 0.5 illustrating no discernable difference between the positive and negative controls. Flag arrays as outliers when the value significantly drops below 0.8. This metric is not sensitive to subtle array quality differences, but a value significantly below 0.8 is a strong indicator of a poor-quality data.

Positive controls are probe sets designed against putative exons of about 100 housekeeping genes shown to be expressed at detectable levels across a variety of tissues. Since the extent of alternative splicing and transcript expression is not known for all tissues, not all exons are expected to be expressed in all tissues.

Negative controls are putative intronic regions of the same 100 housekeeping genes used for positive controls. These probe sets may be expressed in certain tissues through intron retention. They are not true negative controls. Overall, the positive and negative control probe sets provide a medium-size dataset with expected high and low signal values, respectively. This data set is useful to estimate overall data quality through the Pos_vs_neg_auc value.

pm_mean is the mean of the raw intensity for all of the PM probes on the array prior to any intensity transformations. The value of this field can be used to ascertain whether certain chips are unusually dim or bright. Dim or bright chips are not a problem per se, but they warrant a closer inspection of the probeset based metrics to see if a problem results. In addition, the pm_mean and bgrd_mean are usually correlated; therefore, a low pm_mean value with a relatively high bgrd_mean value may be indicative of poor data for a sample.

bgrd_mean is the mean of the raw intensity for the probes used to calculate background prior to any intensity transformations. Note that the bgrd_mean may be higher than the pm_mean. This is because the distribution of GC composition between the background probes and the perfect match probes can be very different. For example, on the exon arrays for any given sample there may be no real target for many of the probes. Thus the pm_mean may be very low (at or near background). In contrast the bgrd_mean may be skewed toward higher values due to the GC rich probes present for the high GC count background bins.

all probeset mean
The mean of the signal of all probe sets included in the analysis. This metric can be used to detect bright or dim arrays. The value is computed after probe summarization and normalization for the probe sets included in the analysis (core content, in this case). The values should be more consistent for biological replicates than for different sample types. Flag outliers in overall study or within same sample type.

X_mad_residual_mean is the mean of the absolute deviation of the residuals from the median. As with the others, this is for all probesets analyzed from category "X". Different probes (features on the chip) will return different intensities when hybridized to a common target. To account for these relative differences in intensity the RMA and PLIER algorithms create models for individual feature responses. One can then use these models to identify chips that have a large number of probes that are behaving differently than predicted by the model, and thus may be indicative of a problematic chip. The difference between the actual value and the predicted value is called the residual. The idea is if there is a robust probe model any given probe will have a typical residual associated with it for this metric (the median residual for that probe is used). If the residual for that probe on any given chip is very different from the median, it means that there is a poorer fit to the model. So, calculating the mean of the absolute value of all the deviations produces a measure of how well or poor all of the probes on a given chip fit the model. An unusually high mean absolute deviation of the residuals from the median suggests problematic data for that chip.

X_rle_mean is the mean absolute relative log expression (RLE) for all the probesets analyzed from category "X". This metric is generated by taking the signal estimate for a given probeset on a given chip and calculating the difference in log base 2 from the median signal value of that probeset over all the chips. The mean is then computed from the absolute RLE for all the probe sets analyzed from category "X". When just the replicates are analyzed together (e.g., RMA-Sketch on just the replicates from tissue A) the mean absolute RLE should be consistently low, reflecting the low biological variability of the replicates.

A good rule of thumb is to flag outliers with have values two standard deviations away from the mean of the metric value for that experiment.

Monitoring Hybridization quality
The bacterial spikes (BioB, BioC, BioD & Cre) are best for monitoring the quality of the hybridization, similar to 3'-based expression. These spikes are added to the hybridization cocktail but are labeled independently of the rest of the sample. The four spikes are input with increasing concentration. A plot of the signal values associated with these spikes should show a trend where BioB < BioC < BioD < Cre.

Monitoring Labeling quality (this is an active area of research and a lack of rank order should not be over interpreted)
The polyA-control RNAs (Lys, Phe, Thr and Dap) are best for monitoring the quality of the labeling reaction. These polyA RNAs are spiked into the sample prior to amplification and labeling. Consequently, these molecules are amplified and labeled with the rest of the biological sample. The rank order of the signal values for these probe sets should show Lys < Phe < Thr < Dap. Note that impurities within the sample RNA can impact the efficiency of the labeling of these controls.
